Egypt was one of the earliest of the
great civilizations which arose
independently on earth 5,000 years ago
the monuments the ancient Egyptians left
behind like this the Great Pyramid of
Khufu at Giza are still among the most
impressive and the most long-lasting
creations of humanity
in the pyramid are enshrined some of the
central concerns of their culture
concerns shared by all civilization even
by the modern West but no civilization
held them for longer or more tenaciously
than the ancient Egyptians over the last
20 years we in the Western world have
become painfully aware of how our
well-being is inextricably bound up with
that of nature and that understanding
has given us a fresh insight into the
psychology of Egyptian civilization
their attitude to religious cult to
rulership to the afterlife and to the
idea of the unchanging stability of the
cosmos and what more dramatic
illustration can there be in the whole
world than the great pyramid and this
room in particular of the human yearning
for immutability for the human concern
for life after death and the fact that
this place has the power to move so much
after so many millennia whatever culture
we come from is a testimony surely not
only to its grandeur of conception and
execution marvelous as that is but also
to the fact that we still share the
impulse which lies behind it and in that
sense we have the late 20th century for
all our modernity are still Bronze Age
people
since ancient times the Egyptians have
experienced so many changes above all in
the triumph of Islam but they might
appear now to be cut off forever from
the age of the Pharaohs but perhaps
there is a deeper sense in which a
society's ideals are passed on a habit
of civilization do you really believe
read the novelist tawfiq al Hakim but
the thousands of years that make up
Egypt's past could have vanished without
trace as if in a dream
you
the Nile said the great Arab traveller
even a Battuta surpasses all the rivers
of the world in sweetness of taste in
length of course and utility
the civilization of Egypt like those of
Iraq India and China drew its life from
a river but this was a country like no
other running for 600 miles between
dunes and cliffs a narrow ribbon of blue
water and green fields on average only
six miles wide this geography shaped the
civilization where the Spirit of Iraq
was pessimistic here when the Nile
flooded each year as the ancient said
the fields laugh men's faces light up
and God rejoices in his heart
you
from the life renewing soil left by the
inundation the Egyptians drew a cheerful
confidence in humanity in the permanence
and stability of things
theirs was an optimistic civilization
you
their civilization grew out of a long
prehistory of culture in the Nile Valley
the coming together of many small
egalitarian farming communities
communities sustained as today by
hard-working peasantry tilling the soil
creating an elaborate filigree of
ditches and dikes
to capture the annual flood
the Aswan High Dam built in 1970 may
have changed this age-old rhythm but
today's Egypt still depends on the
Tilly's
the fella he and what the ancients
called the black earth
not long before 3,000 BC these local
cultures were unified into a single
state the first in history and here at
the very beginning there are clues which
will determine the shape of Egyptian
civilization right down to the Islamic
our search begins in an obscure little
village in Upper Egypt called karma
Lakmal the red man this was the center
of a prehistoric tribal kingdom shrine
of a local divinity called horus the
hawk hence its Greek name Heydrich on
Pallas in 1897 two British archaeologist
squib Ellen Greene came here looking for
the origins of Egypt the Americans came
back in a field beyond the village they
made a stunning discovery a heap of
ceremonial pallets and mace heads from
the ritual stores of Egypt's first Kings
Kings called cobra catfish scope pork so
so the so the Old Kingdom temple is this
whole area here the temple of Horus yeah
is that right in Egypt begin here
the first owns I will my little anymore
would you dinner : area did any of their
fathers working on those excavation but
cuca nationally known yeah among the
finds was perhaps the most significant
object ever dug up in Egypt a slab of
black slate 2 feet long cut with scenes
commemorating the deeds of a king called
Norma whom legend said was the unifier
of Egypt
here is the very moment of Norma's
triumph wearing the crown of Upper Egypt
he dashes out the brains of the captive
king of the Delta headless enemies lion
rose before the standards of horus the
hawk and already a superhuman aura
ron's the king himself and aura of
divinity 90 years on it's very difficult
to see any trace of those momentous
discoveries here in the area where the
palates and the mace heads were found
but a year later Green made an equally
intriguing find in the same area he came
across the remains of a large circular
mound of clean white sand about 50 yards
across an 8 feet high enclosed by a
sloping sandstone revetment there was
evidence of a of a walkway leading to
some central feature Greene thought the
dating was prehistoric before the first
kings of dynastic Egypt and he
interpreted the mound as being a
symbolic representation of the mound of
creation itself the first Island which
had risen out of the Seas of chaos at
the beginning of time and on which the
first life had landed the hawk
the divine kingship of Horus would last
as long as ancient Egypt itself here in
the great temple at edfu that same
creation myth would be expounded in
loving detail for colonial greek
overlords nearly three millennia after
namaste
it was at the heart of the Egyptian
conception of civilization
every Egyptian temple then was a
symbolic representation of that original
mound of creation with that simple read
shrine surrounding the perch on which
the hawk had landed which was created at
high rekon palace and no matter how big
the temples became in later ages the
holy of holies was still that simple
read shrine depicted here at head foo
3,000 years later you can make a line of
reads surrounding the chamber in which
the image of the hawk was kept the
temple was not only though a depiction
of the first place but of the first time
the time when the pattern of a stable
society was handed down to humankind of
kingship law religion and ritual a
pattern which it was believed would
suffice for eternity as long as the
rituals were correctly performed the
universe then and civil society were
conceived of a static progress change
new questions new answers were not
required because they were not needed
and indeed they wouldn't be needed until
Alexander the Great conquered Egypt
three millennia later
for the Egyptians then divine kingship
was the guarantee of a stable cosmos the
same idea can be traced across the world
from Shang China to Aztec Mexico and
here at Abydos those first kings of
Egypt were buried with immense brick
mortuary temples like earthly palaces
and so the key themes of Egyptian
history were laid down centralized power
royal rituals and the cult of the dead
intertwined to form the ideology of the
world's first state
themes still potent even in our own day
moving northwards along the Nile the
narrow valley meets the green expanse of
the Delta at this strategic point close
by today's capital Cairo the Horace
Kings built their Royal City Memphis
on the sandstone escarpment above the
floodplain is the great funeral complex
of the 3rd dynasty kings here at Saqqara
the mud brick architecture of Abydos was
turned into Stern
an immense 200-foot high - of King Josie
the first of the pyramids
in a handful of generations around 2500
BC a series of gifted Kings who nee-san
through
Khufu Khafre building bigger and bigger
as each seems to try to outdo his
predecessor created the greatest series
of funeral monuments but world has ever
seen
you
the most famous the Giza pyramids are
now all but engulfed by the suburbs of
Cairo stripped of their polished
limestone casing and plundered for
building stone but still awesome
there are many myths surrounding the
building of the pyramids the Hollywood
epic version had slave gangs whipped
along by tyrannical masters but Egypt
was not a slave Society the mass of the
workforce was not enslaved in a long
reign it was perfectly possible for a
government to mobilize huge scale state
employment to build such monuments using
the workforce in the wet season when the
Nile flood left idle hands
the graffiti in the cloris we can get
some idea of the character of the gangs
built these pyramids the tough gang the
boys who stay forever Khufu's boys but
exactly how it was done there's very
little evidence for that they must have
worked from an enormous ramp running
from the river with feeder feeder
supports of wooden earth perhaps to
bring the the stones round the Greek
traveler Herodotus who came here in the
450s BC said that he was told by tour
guides that it took twenty years with
the gangs of a hundred thousand men to
do it
the ancient Greeks with typical
cockiness called them pyramids after the
triangular cakes they knew back home we
can see them now in the light of the
artificial mountains built by other
cultures Babylonians Maya and Aztec for
all civilizations have sought validation
for their power over the masses by
creating great public symbols but more
than that the dead King is now a
manifestation of the Sun God himself
when the construction job was finished
the pyramids were covered with a case of
fine Tura limestone and although most of
that has disappeared over the centuries
you can see over there on Catherine's
pyramid the top coating is still there
that's what they look like but what were
they for
they were tombs but what did the shape
me well the pyramid clearly was what it
seems to be a staircase on which the
Kings spirit could ascend to heaven and
then go back to his tomb and what we're
looking at over here is an image of the
Rays of the Sun God coming down to earth
a typical piece of the Egyptian
imagination in which an immaterial
concept is represented in such a
material form and on winters days here
in Giza you can actually sit here and
watch the Sun breaking through the
clouds and falling down at the same
angle as the pyramids a stairway to
heaven then the Rays of the Sun on which
the king
nimble and wise could ascend to the
indestructible stars
the Egyptians created the world's first
unified state in modern terms it was a
provider state providing a basic
standard of living to all its people
through control of irrigation in return
for enormous surpluses to be spent on
tombs temples and palaces through these
great buildings it expressed its
ideologies of power its belief in the
indivisibility of divine and earthly
rule in the need for a stable cosmos
such ideas may have been essential needs
of civilization at the start and yet
even today almost all of us still live
in nation-states with some or all of
those same characteristics our thinking
is still shaped by their religious and
social myths and especially by the myth
of the great ruler king or God for it
was in his name in the Bronze Age but
the many surrendered power to the few to
live in the condition in which most of
the people of the planet still live
today
worship of the great ruler was perhaps a
necessary stage in the development of
civilization but even now in the TV age
kings and presidents and popes used the
vast array of visual aids invented here
in which we see all around us to boost
their authority and do we not still
engage in ruler worship ourselves
whenever we chair a presidential
motorcade as it sweeps by or to
celebrate the Jubilee of the Queen of
England the street passes escorted by
beefeaters in 16th century costume or
watch Musketeers give an antiquated
salute on the White House lawn perhaps
then we are only just emerging from the
spell of the Bronze Age Revolution which
created civilization and shaped our ways
of thinking in the long term in history
we have perhaps still too close to them
to see ourselves as we really are
in ancient Egypt the ties binding people
to the state were not only economic but
religious and the great event in its
religious life was the pilgrimage to
Abydos each year thousands of people set
out for the little town in middle Egypt
to celebrate the resurrection of Osiris
king of the Dead
the pilgrimage provided a focus for
feelings of ordinary Egyptians and
rather like Hindus today at Banaras or
Shia Muslims of Corolla many asked to be
brought in Abydos for Barry
you
and at abydos we find another of egypt's
great legacies to the world
it's still a haunting place cradled in
an immense curve of the western cliffs
the realm of the Dead a holy place since
prehistory
in the ruins of the sacred city the
temple of seti the first built in 1300
BC still survives it's one of the peaks
of ancient old
moving from daylight into its darkened
inner sanctum the visitor has an uncanny
intimation of a still active residue of
spiritual power
long before the Christians and Muslims
even ordinary Egyptians came to believe
in an eternal soul in a Last Judgment
and in resurrection after death
these great conceptions were acted out
in a public passion play at abydos and
are depicted on the temple walls here as
a rite of passage for King SETI himself
here too are many motifs familiar to
Christians especially the role of the
Divine Mother Isis here Isis is
caressing SETI on her knee and she says
to him you're my son come out of me I
have nourished you that you may be Lord
of the two lands I have made your body
strong in victory against all the
enemies who may come against you your
Majesties King of eternity a Falcon
abiding forever
and here's Isis giving the breath of
life to SETI and above her her words are
you have made your mansion
your temple to magnify our nature and
adorned it with all the kinds of
excellent stonework and your reward for
this will be the lifespan of the sky or
as long as Abydos shall exist first
sight these gestures and actions may
seem more archaic and bizarre but if you
just step back a little and feed for
example what a Muslim or a Buddhist or
even a Protestant would make of seeing
for the first time a solemn Roman
Catholic Mass then a lot of those tender
gestures which are so familiar to
Christians would lose their meaning in
all religions in the world simple and
often strange gestures can carry
profound truths and it was just the same
in Egyptian religion which certainly did
not lack ethical content but the key to
understanding the function of this great
building lies in these little chapels
just at the end of this room
in this inner shrine the climax to the
whole riddle
it's concerned the installation king
setting nothingness Cyrus's heir living
king but with his union with a cyrus
after death here Isis and Paris perform
rituals for him and SETI is now dead and
deified here he's represented as a mummy
in a wide round and over there on the
far wall blackened by smoke and age SETI
restored to the colors of living flesh
and blood comes into the presence of a
cyrus where he will become one
resurrected himself with the resurrected
King of the Dead so the simple and
strange gestures reveal a simple yet
profound message a belief in
righteousness on earth in the Last
Judgement in eternal life though not in
damnation which had no place in the
Egyptians optimistic view of things but
these ideas would play a key role in the
later development of Christianity and of
Islam art in the desert at Abydos
millions of broken pots still lie where
the ancient pilgrims left them as
offerings to their God
for them the wind roaring down the great
gorge in the western cliffs was the
sound of the spirits of the Dead whose
annual pilgrimage to a cyrus they
believed would continue as long as
Abydos exists
in 332 BC Egypt was conquered by
Alexander the Great and then Egyptian
civilization turned away from its
immemorial roots towards the sea and a
wider world
on the Mediterranean coast a new capital
was founded which became the meeting
place of Europe and Asia on the shore of
Africa Alexandra the greatest market in
the inhabited world wrote the Roman
strable beacon to traders from all
nations who came by land and sea bearing
spices from South India and the
treasures of the Silk Route to China
it's paradise here said the poet headed
us you can get anything you want money
shows games women wine boys the best
library in the world in short all
Earthly Delights
like twenties New York Hellenistic
Alexandria was a land of opportunities
whose streets were paved with gold
it drew immigrants of all kinds bankers
Clark's engineers poets even religious
dropouts these extraordinary mummy
portraits allow us literally to look
into the eyes of such people even we
feel to sense their hopes and fears vain
and violent rich and prosperous it was
said they've only one God here ma'am
our good life in Alexandria was brief
read the code colorful but how potent
were the perfumes
how splendid the bed on which we lay and
to what sensual delight we gave our
bodies
down here in the catacombs of Alexandria
you can still enter that weird and
wonderful world where Egyptian and Greek
Jewish and oriental religion and magic
met and intermingled the Greeks who came
here to Egypt were very open-minded by
the local gods the deep experience of
Mediterranean paganism made it easy for
them to identify a modern with Zeus or
to say the Egyptians worshipped
Aphrodite the goddess of love but they
called her Hathor and how that worked in
practice you can see in this astonishing
tomb deep below the streets of
Alexandria at first sight it looks like
a typically Egyptian tomb with papyrus
columns and the winged disk of the Sun
behind the row of cobras heads but when
you look closer you notice human figures
in ancient Egyptian poses but with
greco-roman faces on each side of a door
Guardian serpents but carrying the snake
entwined staff of Hermes the Greek guide
of souls and above them
Medusa's heads and when you go inside
the tomb itself you can see that the
sarcophagi are decorated with
traditional Greek motifs bunches of
grapes wreaths cattle skulls and masks
but above them are the ancient gods of
Egypt
there's Isis protecting the sacred bull
with her wings and over here fought the
god of wisdom the falcon-headed Horus
tending to the mummy of the dead and
here even the jackal-headed Anubis the
guardian of the Dead wearing greco-roman
military gear this then is the strange
synthesis that emerged in Greek Egypt
it was said that Alexander had hoped to
create a new world order based on his
multiracial ideal of brotherhood among
nations but with hindsight ironically we
can see that his Hellenistic Empire
actually laid the cultural foundations
of Islam
when he died in Babylon age 32
Alexander's body was brought back for
burial in a lavish tomb in Alexandria
it's never been found but the clues
point to this tiny mosque in the heart
of the old city
an arab traveller who came here in the
ninth century a.d described this place
as the mosque of the two-horned prophet
strange echo of the ram's horn helmet
with which the Egyptian priests of Amun
had crowned Alexander the Great and
through the Middle Ages it was revered
not only as the tomb of the prophet
Daniel which is still done but also as
the tomb of the king and prophet
Iskandar Alexander the Great himself
the tunnels and cellars fan out from
underneath this mask have never been
explored properly but that's not really
surprising the city's absolutely
honeycombed with them and they're really
dangerous there's a great Alexandrian
story of the fat bride who on her
wedding procession fell through a hole
in the street and disappeared and
despite the best efforts of the guests
she was never seen again
in 1850 a servant of the Russian
consulate came down here and got lost in
the corridors when he came out he said
that he'd seen in a gap in the stonework
a chamber with a glass coffin and a
human body with a gold ID around its
head and fragments of papyrus everywhere
that description closely matches the
last classical witnesses of the tomb of
Alexander the Great
but suspiciously so he was probably
lying nevertheless it's an intriguing
thought that solution to the greatest
mystery in the history of Alexandria
could lie somewhere behind one of these
blocks up corridors
it's 3 a.m. in the remote monastery of
st. Paul near the Red Sea the monks
begin their devotions before dawn
Oh
these are Christian cops
their name means Egyptians and their
language and music contains survivals
from fair onic times their culture goes
back to the early centuries ad when
Egypt became part of a Christian Roman
Empire and even today they represent
nearly 10% of Egypt's population this
church was founded in the 3rd century AD
by Saint Paul the anchorite
and with the Christians we come to the
second great foreign transformation of
the native culture of the Nile Valley in
late Roman Egypt an upheaval began as
momentous as any political revolution a
change in the psyche of Near Eastern
culture which has helped shape the
Western mind ever since a vision of life
which believed in withdrawal from the
world monasticism
at this time the blue water and emerald
fields of the Nile Valley were exchanged
for the inhospitable desert there are
strange parallels with our own time in
the widespread feeling that civilization
itself had failed better cities may
arise one day said the Egyptian
philosopher platini's our children
though conceived in a sinful age may
build better than their fathers
and so the old fabric of pagan culture
the stable cosmos which had sustained
Egyptians for so long was eroded by
Christianity with its appeal not to a
great earthly ruler but to a distant
High God
this was a time said one when we
realized how insecure the human
condition is
these fateful changes were mirrored in
the way people saw the world for nearly
a thousand years classical Mediterranean
art had glorified the physical world in
the belief that mankind as the Greek
said was the measure of all things now
artists retreat into a crude language of
symbols
to us in the age of Freud and Jung it
looks like a failure of nerve a loss of
faith in the material world perhaps even
deeper psychic trauma everything has
gone said Cyprian honesty friendship
skill in the arts standards in morals
this vast and wonderful world is heading
for destruction
and so with st. Paul of Egypt the stage
was set for fundamentalists of all
persuasions to fight over the legacy of
the Ancients
be sure and other horrid things
chief of the anchorites for the city
Alexandra
ad - too late
died 83 for three
a revolution of the mind was now in
process and out of this crisis a new
religion would emerge as the dominant
culture of the whole region in 641 Egypt
was conquered by Muslim Arabs barring a
new gospel that of the Prophet Mohammed
and here in ed foo the town of Horus
ordinary Egyptian people in their
mud-brick slums around the temple soon
began to abandon the uncertainties of
the past for the certainties of a single
God Islam
and so here in ed foo in Upper Egypt as
throughout the Mediterranean and Near
Eastern world's the Christians and the
Muslims were the inheritors of the
ancients and their belief in a single
God which the Morrisons are chanting now
from their minarets developed out of a
tendency long apparent in the ancient
world for the the Catholic papacy the
Muslim Caliphate the Orthodox churches
of the Greeks and Syrians and cops all
stem from the attempt of men to rule
their fellow men and women under a
distant high and all-powerful God and
the effects of that tremendous
revolution at the end of the late
antique world still shape our lives
today the last Greek religious papyrus
from 7th century Egypt sets the seal on
that revolution for it gives in Greek
the very words we can hear around us now
in the name of God the merciful and the
compassionate there is one God and one
God alone and it goes on in Greek Marc
med Apostolou steel Muhammad is the
apostle of God with that to all intents
and purposes the world of the ancient
Egyptians had passed
the change to Islam would take many
centuries and out in the countryside
especially in Upper Egypt that deeper
layers of the past are still visible
today
it's the eve of the full moon in
mid-march heralding the onset of the
heat of summer
and at this time tens of thousands of
people coming from the countryside to
descend on the little town of Luxor for
a great annual festival
up here people still celebrate the
ancient feast days the spring festival
the rising of the Nile and especially
the 40 days of mourning for the dead
but this is the biggest it's a Muslim
festival for an Islamic saint but it
takes place at a mosque inside one of
the great pagan temples of ancient Egypt
the Coptic Christians take part too for
they also once had a church inside the
temple
the saint himself Adil ha GOG died in
the 11th century at the point when Islam
was becoming the majority religion here
his tomb inside the mosque has been a
place of pilgrimage ever since as
everywhere orthodoxy may demand one
thing but what the people do is another
matter
and in the worship of sheiks and saints
the ordinary people the fella Hien fill
the void between their daily hopes and
fears and that distant High God the
night is passed in passionate
celebration with the traditional music
and songs of Upper Egypt
the two lands may have been United 5,000
years ago but the South is still a
distinct country and tonight
a man from the Delta would be a complete
stranger here
next day the festival reaches its climax
the living descendants of the saint lead
a huge procession around the ancient
temple and it's mosque
bearing representations of the coffins
of Haggai in his sons bringing up the
procession our luck soars gilda ferryman
bearing boats there on trucks these days
but nonetheless the ferryman are
discharging their traditional duty just
as their ancestors did thousands of
years ago when around the streets of
ancient Luxor they bore the boat of the
Sun God on the day ends not in solemnity
but in carnival and license
you
Oh
the ancient legacy also survived in the
city
Kairo the mother of cities as even about
to toss said
it's numberless buildings peerless in
the beauty and splendor
a meeting place of travellers shelter of
the strong and weak whose throngs of
people's surged like the scene
founded in sight of the ancient capital
Memphis and the pyramids of giza and
sakara cairo has long been the cultural
capital of Arab Islam
and here too even today in its mosques
and university we can still find a
living link with the world of the
Pharaohs a civilization conservative in
character like it's ancient predecessor
here in the al-azhar the leading
teaching mosque of Islam older than
Oxford / Sorbonne
learning is still the study of the
sacred texts binding the land together
as it did in ancient Egypt in City and
countryside then the modern Egyptians
still do some of the things their
ancestors did for all the apparently
cataclysmic breaks in their history
now here in Cairo in the late 14th
century those questions were examined by
the greatest of all Islamic historians
even a khaldoun his concerns were the
same as ours in these films the nature
of civilization is rise and decline he
considered that settled cooperative
human life was the goal of civilization
but it went in cycles of growth and
decay like all forms of life he thought
incidentally that overconsumption in
society was an inevitable cause of
decline but but under certain favorable
conditions of geography and climate and
the character and customs of the people
culture could acquire a rootedness that
he called the habit of civilization and
in all history Egypt was perhaps the
best example of that habit the Pharaohs
he points out had political paths for
3,000 years they were followed by the
Greeks and the Romans and then the
legacy taken on by Islam so the habit of
civilization was continuous here nowhere
else in the world was it more firmly
rooted and that perhaps explains Egypt's
continuing cultural leadership in the
Islamic world today at the beginning lay
the early Egyptian state the first
comprehensive attempt in human history
to satisfy the needs of men and women to
live together in an ordered state with a
degree of happiness and material
well-being and so far it's been one of
the most successful
and so even after the triumph of Islam
the legacy of the Pharaohs did not give
up all its numinous path
and it has not yet
you